Florida residents have been warned to prepare for a "direct hit", as Hurricane Matthew pounded the Bahamas after devastating parts of Haiti.
Damage could be "catastrophic", the state governor said. Evacuation orders have been issued along the coast.
Matthew, with winds of 115mph (185km/h), is expected to strengthen and hit Florida as a Category Four storm, US officials say.
It has swept across the Caribbean, with the worst of the damage in Haiti.
At least 22 people have been killed in Haiti and thousands displaced. The storm has forced the presidential election there to be postponed.
Four people were also killed in the neighbouring Dominican Republic.
Hurricane Matthew in pictures
Animated guide: Hurricanes
Struggle to reach Haitian storm zone
Haitians describe hurricane ordeal
As of 0600GMT, the storm was over the Bahamas, where all air and sea traffic has been halted and people urged to move to higher ground.
People living on some southern shores are facing storm surges, officials warned.
Hurricane Matthew was expected to pass near Grand Bahama Island and "move very close" to the east coast of the Florida peninsula on Thursday night, the US National Hurricane Center (NHC) said.
"Everyone in our state must prepare now for a direct hit," Florida Governor Rick Scott told a news conference.
"If Matthew directly impacts Florida, the destruction could be catastrophic and you need to be prepared."
Florida's history of hurricanes
October 2005: Hurricane Wilma, Deaths were reported in Haiti, Mexico, Cuba. Struck Florida as a Category Three, killing five people. South Florida suffered widespread damage
August 2004: Hurricane Charley. Struck Florida as a Category Four, killing nine and causing billions of dollars in property damage
August 1992: Hurricane Andrew. Category Five storm struck South Florida, killing 44 and damaging more than 125,000 houses
A map showing Hurricane Arthur's path
Some two million people have been advised to evacuate across coastal areas of Florida, Georgia and South Carolina.
"If there is an evacuation order in your community, you need to take it seriously," US President Barack Obama said.
Cars queued for fuel and residents stocked up on food in affected areas, local reports said.
In South Carolina, the lanes on a section of major highway were reversed so vehicles could head west away from the storm.
Workers board up a restaurant ahead of Hurricane Matthew in Atlantic Beach, Florida, on 5 October 2016Image copyrightAFP
Image caption
In Florida residents are being warned of "catastrophic" damage
Motorists wait in a line of cars to buy gas at a Chevron gasoline station, in Florida on 5 October 2016Image copyrightAP
Image caption
In some areas of Florida, motorists have been queuing to fill their cars
Children are seen before damaged property in the Carbonera community of Guantanamo, Cuba following Hurricane Matthew on 5 October 5 2016Image copyrightAFP
Image caption
The storm passed from Haiti to Cuba, damaging buildings
People walk in a flooded area after Hurricane Matthew in Les CayesImage copyrightREUTERS
Image caption
Rescue workers warn that the scale of the damage in Haiti is still not known
In Haiti, meanwhile, rescue workers are struggling to reach areas cut off by the storm.
Officials said they were not yet in a position to gauge the true extent of the damage - particularly in the Grand Anse area, which was directly in the storm's path.
A key bridge had been destroyed, roads were impassable and phone communications were down, officials said.
Mourad Wahba, the UN special representative for Haiti, said at least 10,000 people were in shelters and hospitals were overflowing.
At the scene: Tony Brown, BBC News, Haiti
flood
We only began to see the real destructive force of Hurricane Matthew once we moved towards the south-west of the country.
Trees fallen, banana crops uprooted and flattened, houses under water and men and women trying to get the debris out of the way.
It was noticeable how the people we passed were coping alone. There were no army or police around to help. Even the aid agencies are struggling to move around this damaged corner of the country.
Read more
Jump media playerMedia player helpOut of media player. Press enter to return or tab to continue.
Media captionHurricane Matthew's deadly passage so far
"It's not looking good," said Jean Claude Fignole, programme director in Haiti for the aid agency Oxfam,
"We're getting reports out of the southwest of Haiti... reports of schools that have been completely destroyed, many homes that have been destroyed."
Matthew is the region's most powerful hurricane since Felix in 2007.
Hurricane scales
Map showing the world's seven tropical cyclone basins and what the storms that form there are called - 23 October 2015
Category one: sustained winds of 74-95mph (119-153 km/h); some damage and power cuts
Category two: winds of 96-110mph (154-177 km/h); extensive damage
Category three: winds of 111-129mph (178-208 km/h); well-built homes suffer major damage
Category four: winds of 130-156mph (209-251 km/h); severe damage to well-built homes, most trees snapped or uprooted
Category five: winds of 157 mph (252 km/h) or higher; high percentage of homes destroyed, area uninhabitable for weeks or months
Source: NOAA




The winner of the Nobel Peace Prize will be announced this Friday in the Norwegian capital, Oslo.
Predicting who will win is notoriously difficult, not least because of the secrecy surrounding the award.
Last year, the prize went to the Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet, a group lauded for helping their country's transition to democracy.
The Nobel Committee defied expectations that German Chancellor Angela Merkel might win for her response to the European migrant crisis.
Nominees are officially kept secret for 50 years, but those eligible to nominate candidates - which include parliamentarians, university professors and former Nobel Peace Prize Laureates - often reveal who they have put up for the prize.
Winners throughout the years
Of this year's record 376 candidates, 228 are individuals and 148 are organisations.
Nominees reportedly up for the gong range from the Afghan Cycling Federation's women's team (representing the bicycle) to Donald Trump (for his "vigorous peace through strength ideology").
Here are some of the candidates who have been touted as frontrunners for the prize:
Svetlana Gannushkina
This file photo taken on October 4, 2012 shows Russian human rights activist Svetlana Gannushkina, head of refugee aid organization Civil AssistanceImage copyrightAFP
Image caption
Ms Gannushkina has fought for decades to protect migrant and refugee rights in Russia
Prominent Russian human rights activist Svetlana Gannushkina's Civic Assistance Committee provides legal help, aid and education to migrants and refugees.
Her organisation says it has helped more than 50,000 people since 1990.
Ms Gannushkina recently won the Right Livelihood Award, said to be the "alternative Nobel" - a prize also picked up by Syria's White Helmets rescue group (profiled below).
Kristian Berg Harpviken, director of the Peace Research Institute Oslo, placed her at the top of his shortlist for the prize this year.
Given the record number of people displaced globally and the heated debate about refugee resettlement in the West, Ms Gannushkina's advocacy played an important role, he said.
A prize for her, aside from recognising her tireless rights work, "would also draw attention to the problematic record of the current Russian leadership", he added.
Civic Assistance was last year labelled a "foreign agent" by the Russian government and experts say that giving Ms Gannushkina the prize could lead to backlash from Moscow.
Daring to choose her, or the independent Russian newspaper Novaya Gazeta (which was deemed a frontrunner last year by some) would "really underline the independence of the committee," Norwegian historian and peace prize expert Asle Sveen told the BBC.
Negotiators of the Iranian nuclear deal
US Secretary of Energy Ernest Moniz (R) and Head of the Iranian Atomic Energy Organization Ali Akbar Salehi (L) meet in Vienna, Austria, July 9, 2015.Image copyrightAFP
Image caption
Ali Akbar Salehi and Ernest Moniz negotiated the technical details of the nuclear deal
The diplomats responsible for the July 2015 deal - most prominently US Secretary of State John Kerry and his Iranian and EU counterparts Mohammad Javad Zarif and Federica Mogherini - had been tipped by some observers for the prize last year.
This year, given steady progress on the deal, including international sanctions on Iran being lifted in January to reward compliance, the Nobel Committee might decide to acknowledge its architects for their contribution to world peace in a turbulent time.
But Iranian and American involvement in Syria's continuing civil war could make a peace prize win for their foreign ministers a tricky proposition.
Instead, Mr Sveen and Mr Harpviken both believe US Energy Secretary Ernest Moniz and Atomic Energy Organization of Iran head Ali Akbar Salehi could make better candidates.
The pair, whom share ties with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), negotiated technical details of the agreement.
Their work together represents "a fine example of science diplomacy - the activation of scholarly competence to build bridges between people and nations," Mr Harpviken says.
But an award to them would not be free of controversy, with Israel and US Republicans, who opposed the nuclear deal, likely to lead criticism.
Colombia's peace accord
A man reads a newspaper with the headline that reads in Spanish: Image copyrightAP
Image caption
Colombians said "no" to the peace deal, possibly ruling out negotiators' hopes of a Nobel
The end of a devastating 52-year war in Colombia through a negotiated accord is the kind of effort that many believed the Nobel Committee would not be able to ignore.
It has a long history of acknowledging peace processes in places like Northern Ireland, Israel/Palestine and Vietnam.
But the prospect of the award going to Colombian President Juan Manuel Santos and Farc rebel leader Rodrigo Londono (known as Timochenko) was dealt a significant blow on Sunday, when voters rejected the agreement in a shock referendum result.
It is now seen as highly unlikely. Still, the committee may have made their decision before the referendum and could still go ahead with it "to encourage [the peacemakers] to carry on", Mr Sveen says.
The last peace prize given to the Latin American region was in 1992 and there could also be a geographical consideration, he added.
Syria's 'White Helmets'
The Syria Civil Defence, known for their characteristic white helmets, rush to bomb sites in war-torn Syria and pull out victims from rubble, often facing the great risk of follow-up air strikes.
The nearly 3,000 strong group, made up of students, teachers, farmers and other volunteers, is credited with saving tens of thousands of people. They work under the motto that "to save a life is to save all of humanity" and, despite operating largely in rebel-held areas, insist on their neutrality.
Syrian Civil Defence members, known as the White Helmets, search on June 6, 2016 for survivors amid the rubble of destroyed buildingsImage copyrightAFP
Image caption
The White Helmets claim to have saved more than 62,000 lives
The subject of a recent Netflix documentary, the White Helmets are increasingly in the global public eye, though the Syrian government has accused them of being politically partisan.
A campaign backing them for the Nobel has received more than 204,000 signatures. But it is unclear who would represent them at the ceremony and an award for the White Helmets could reignite longstanding debates about how the committee defines peace promotion, given it would be recognising humanitarian efforts.
Nonetheless, a win for them would "draw attention to the remarkable - yet rarely celebrated - resilient forces of societies hit by armed conflict", Mr Harpviken says.
White helmets win 'alternative Nobel'